why unix?
more stable
faster
more compatible
works well with networking multiple computers

What is Unix?
multi-process operating system
multi user
developed in Bell Labs in the 60’s, released in 1973
Most popular: Linux & Darwin(MAC OSX)

Unix Features
Almost all data is stored as plaintext files
easier for developers to look at data and understand what’s going on
nested subdirectories(folders within folders within folders)
composed of many small programs
input-output redirection
Unix philosophy: The Unix philosophy emphasizes building short, simple, clear, modular, and extensible code that can be easily maintained and repurposed by developers other than its creators. The Unix philosophy favors composability as opposed to monolithic design.

Kernel
sits between programs and the machine.   Allocates memory, directs different actions to different devices.
Kernel is safe from hackers, programs live in protected environment, password required when the kernel does anything.

Shell
Provides the user interface to the kernel
Originally just a command line interpreter
Later redesigned to be a graphical user interface
Programmers use Shell to refer to the command line
The Shell is kind of line a turtle shell to the kernel

REPL(read, evaluate, print, loop)
 - interactive computer programming environment


absolute path - starts with a slash
relative path - does not start with a slash

history - displays history of all commands typed into terminal
ll - fish shorthand for ls -l
la - shorthand for ls -a
less - display contents of a file, one screen at a time
pipe ( | ) - Pass the output of one command to another for further processing.
> - Redirect output from a command to a file on disk. overwrites existing content
>> - Append output from a command to an existing file on disk.
mv source target - moves source file to the target location
rm file - removes a given file
rm -rf folder - recursively delete a folder and all files.
nano filename - open file in nano, a text editor that runs in the terminal.
chmod options filename - change the read, write, executre permissions
  of a given file or folder.
grep string filname - looks for a string inside the file.

